[ Applause ]
>> Hello, and welcome.
I'm Emma Alberici the host
of Lateline on the ABC,
and I'm here with Rutger Bregman
who has a fairly
radical proposition.
[Laughs] So imagine
everyone gets an income
and you don't have
to work for it.
Awesome. [Laughs] And on
top of that, if you do work,
you only have to
work 15 hours a week.
And all the borders are open.
So you go wherever you like and
no one questions you about it.
That's apparently
Utopia for Realists.
I'm not sure that it's
Utopia for politicians.
[ Laughter ]
So Utopia for Realists
examines a different approach
to economics and to life and
it challenges us all to think
in a way that modern politics
wouldn't dare allow us to,
certainly not with Donald Trump
in the White House wanting
to build walls, and Brexit and
Guilders in the Netherlands
and Marine Lapen in France
and Colin Hanson indeed here.
Rutger Bregman is a Dutch
historian who started writing
about this idea of a basic wage
back in 2013 long before many
of the concepts he espouses
could ever be called mainstream.
The book is an international
bestseller.
We're lucky to have him here.
Welcome. Join me in thanking
him for being with us.
[ Applause ]
We're just going to be in
conversation for this hour.
So I'll open it up and then
I'll start the questions
and then we've got two
microphones at either side here
and I'll invite you
to participate
in the conversation shortly.
So I guess we'll start by
just the simple question
of what is a universal
basic income?
Give us the concept.
>> It's a very simple idea.
So everyone would receive a
monthly grant that is enough
to pay for your basic needs,
food, shelter, clothing.
So that's it.
Basic income is really a floor
in the income distribution.
So it's not the same
as communism.
It's not that everyone will
receive the same amount
of money.
It's sort of you could
see it as venture capital
for the people, right?
For the first time, everyone
will have the freedom to decide
for themselves what to
make of their lives.
And say for example everyone
could say no to a job
that they don't want to do.
It's a very simple idea with
quite radical implications.
>> But it is the same
amount for everyone?
>> Yeah. Yeah, it's
the basic income
that everyone would receive it.
Whether you're employed or
unemployed, whether you're poor
or rich, man or woman,
it doesn't matter.
Everyone gets it.
>> And how is it calculated?
And how on earth do
countries afford such a thing?
>> A big part of my book is
about how would this
work in practice?
That is the realist
part of the title.
When I started researching
this subject in 2013, it was --
well, in the first place
it was completely forgotten
and what I could find about
it was quite abstract.
So a lot of people thinking
about what is human nature like,
what will you do
with a basic income?
What would I do?
Will we all be lazy?
Et cetera.
And I was really interested
in the practical question,
you know, has it
ever been tried?
And it turns out there
have been huge experiments,
forgotten experiments in the
'70's in Canada and the US,
and since then in
other places as well
where they actually tried it.
And it turns out that
it works very well.
I even discovered,
which is probably one
of the craziest stories in the
book, is that Richard Nixon
of all people almost
implemented a basic income
at the beginning of the '70's.
>> In fact, it was very popular.
I recall something like 90% of
the population were in favour.
Republicans were on
board generally en masse.
>> Yeah. At the end of the
'60's, almost everyone in the US
and in Canada believed
that some form
of basic income was
going to be implemented.
So for example, John Kenneth
Galbraith the left-wing
economist, he thought
it was a great idea.
But also Milton Friedman, you
know, the neo-liberal economist.
They actually agreed on the need
for a guaranteed annual income.
Martin Luther King, he
was in favour of it.
So it's not that Richard Nixon
was suddenly a great philosopher
or utopian thinker.
He was just saying,
"Oh, everyone wants it.
Let's do it then."
>> And it's interesting because
back then also it united the
unions, the corporate
sector, churches.
And I was just getting
in my notes here,
because there's a
quote from Nixon
where he says it was the
most significant piece
of social legislation
in our nation's history.
So why didn't it go ahead?
>> It's a pretty bizarre story
full of crazy coincidences.
>> US politics?
[ Laughter ]
>> What happened in the
first place is that, well,
everyone was in favour
of basic income.
Richard Nixon had a proposal for
a modest basic income and it got
through the House of
Representatives twice.
But then it hit the Senate floor
and Democrats started to think,
"Well, if this is going
to be implemented anyway,
we want a higher basic income.
So let's just vote
against it now
and then it will probably get
higher in the second round."
Didn't really work out that way.
So it was basically killed
by the left in the Senate.
The idea finally died in 1978
with an experiment in Seattle,
one of the big basic
income experiences
with a lot of positive results.
So crime went down.
Kids performed much
better in school.
You know, healthcare
costs went down.
Basically it turned out that
basic income was an investment
that pays for itself
in the long run.
But there was one big problem.
The researchers found out that
the divorce rate went up by 50%.
[ Laughter ]
So you can imagine at that point
all the conservatives saying,
"We can't have basic income.
This will make women
much too independent.
You know, we really
don't want basic income."
>> Was there a connexion drawn
between the basic income
and the divorce rate?
Was there an obvious
kind of thread there?
>> Well, that's what
they thought, yeah,
that it was really
caused by a basic income.
That suddenly a woman can
say, "I want to leave him.
Now I've got the
freedom to do so."
The thing is that
years later they found
out that it was a
statistical mistake.
[ Laughter ]
So in reality the divorce
rate did not go up at all.
But back then we were already in
the era of Reagan and et cetera
and the idea was forgotten.
>> How is a basic income
any different to welfare?
>> I think in a few
important ways.
The most important way in
which it's different is
that a basic income is
absolutely unconditional.
What we've seen in the past 30
years is that the welfare state
from Holland to Australia
has become more
and more conditional, actually
quite humiliating for the people
who have to rely on it.
Time and time again,
the assumption is
that government bureaucrats know
better what the poor should do
with their lives than
the poor themselves.
The idea behind basic income
is that poverty is not a lack
of character but
just a lack of cash.
And you can cure a lack of cash
pretty easily with cash, right?
[ Laughter ]
>> How novel.
>> Yeah. Once you've
seen the light,
it's very simple actually.
[ Laughter ]
But it actually works.
I think that's the
most important thing.
My book is I believe a
very evidence-based book.
And I believe that's
also the way forward,
is to do more of
those experiments.
And that's actually
what's happening
around the world right now.
I mean, Finland is just
doing a big experiment.
Canada has just announced one.
A lot of people in Silicon
Valley are enthusiastic
about this idea.
So yeah, it's really
spreading around the globe.
>> But isn't there also
evidence that when people come
into money, they
often squander it?
That when they haven't
had to work for it,
they make poor decisions?
>> Well, if you watch a
lot of reality television,
I can imagine that
you'd believe that.
[ Laughter ]
One of the stories in my book is
about a pretty crazy experience
that happened in London in 2009.
And this was a social
organisation that worked
with chronically homeless men.
And there were about 13 of them
and they had tried pretty
much everything at that point
and nothing really worked.
So it was simply time
for something new.
And one of the people who
worked there said, "You know,
why not try something
really new?
Let's just give them money.
3,000 pounds, and let's
see what happens."
Now even at that organisation,
obviously most people
were quite sceptical,
but they were wasting
money anyway,
so let's see what happens.
Now a year after the experience,
7 out of 13 of the men --
and some of them had been living
on the streets for 40 years --
but 7 of the 13 of them had
a roof above their head.
Two more had applied for housing
and all had made
significant decisions
to invest in their lives.
So what did they
use the money for?
One of them bought a dictionary.
Another bought [inaudible].
One of them took
gardening classes.
It was pretty incredible to see
that the money really
empowered the men
and for the first time they
felt like society trusted them
to make their own decisions.
Now the twist comes at the end
because that's when you look
at the financial
side of the story.
You could say, "Well, we've got
to do this because we've got
to pity the poor or
pity the homeless.
It's the moral thing to do."
But it actually also
makes financial sense.
The project in total
cost 50,000 pounds.
That's about seven times less
than what they would normally
spend on these homeless men.
So even The Economist, you
know, nota very utopian,
left-wing magazine, right?
Even they wrote, "The
best way to spend money
on the homeless might be
just to give it to them."
And to be honest, I think that
is almost always the case.
That if we want to
help the poor,
just solve the problem,
you know.
Don't try to manage the
symptoms, but solve the problem.
And the problem is
the lack of cash.
That's it.
>> There's a talk in your TED
Talk about the other approaches
of people thinking
they know what's best
and buying certain
things for them
and giving poor kids teddy
bears in countries and so on.
>> Yeah.
>> Things they don't need.
>> When I gave the TED Talk,
I had one line in my talk.
I said, you know, we should
get rid of the vast industry
of bureaucratic paternalists and
simply hand over their salaries
to the poor they're
supposed to help.
And the TED audience was really
like clapping and laughing
and I was a big confused because
I'm talking about you guys.
[ Laughter ]
>> So you mentioned this
right at the outset,
that one of the instincts
people have is,
"Doesn't this create kind
of a bunch of lazy sloths
who don't work anymore and
just collect the money?"
That's kind of instinctively
what you think would end
up happening.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> A bunch of people
would say, "Well,
what am I going to
go to work for.
I'm getting paid anyway."
>> Exactly, exactly.
I think we have a very
mistaken image of human nature.
I mean, if you watch a lot of
the news as most of us do --
I believe it's one
of the biggest addictions
in our society.
>> Thank God.
>> Well, good for you.
[ Laughter ]
It's a big problem
for me, actually.
I mean, the news is always
about exceptions, right?
It's about things that go wrong,
about corrupting,
crises, terrorism.
So if you watch a
lot of the news,
at the end of the day you
know exactly how the world
doesn't work.
Because you've only heard
about these weird exceptions.
And you'll have a quite
negative image of human nature.
You'll think that most people,
again, the yare probably going
to be lazy or want to be
free riders, et cetera.
So I think the only way to
combat that misperception is
by telling stories about
what actually happens
when you give people
something like free money.
And the book is full of
those kind of stories.
>> A lot of people on the
surface would look at this
and say this is a bunch of
socialist tripe because apart
from anything else, it would
seem to run entirely counter
to capitalism and the notion
of kind of small government.
>> I think it's completely
the other way around.
I believe the basic income would
be the crowning achievement
of capitalism.
It would give everyone the
freedom to start a new company,
move to a different job,
move to a different city.
It will make capitalism
much more dynamic.
I mean, if you think about
it, just the incredible amount
of talent we are wasting
right now in two ways.
So still, around
the developed world,
millions of people are
withering away in poverty.
That's just a very bad
use of resources to say it
like an economist would.
And I think one of the
biggest taboos here is
that about a third of
the workforce according
to recent polls is
now stuck in a job
that they think is
completely meaningless, right?
So there was a poll in
the UK two years ago,
found out that 37% of
British workers have a job
that they think is just useless,
doesn't add anything of value.
Now we're not talking
about teachers
or garbage collectors
or nurses here.
We're talking about
consultants and bankers
and lawyers, et cetera.
So people who are
very successful
in the knowledge economy,
who have great resumes,
great salaries, who still
at the end of the day --
well, maybe you need to
give them one day or two,
but they'll admit it's not
very useful what they're doing.
In fact, in the book you talk --
I think you've called
them bullshit jobs.
[ Laughter ]
Am I quoting you correctly?
>> Well, it's a very
scientific concept.
[ Laughter ]
It was originally
coined by David Graber,
an American anthropologist
who wrote a fascinating essay
on the phenomenon
of bullshit jobs.
And it's just astounding.
You know, when I started
researching it, I first thought,
you know, "How big can this be?"
Right? I mean, we've
got capitalism,
we've got the invisible hand
that is supposed to get rid
of all bullshit, of all jobs
that are not very necessary.
I started researching it more
and more and when I wrote
about it people started
sending me emails and tweets
and you know, connecting
on Facebook
and saying, "Yes, yes, yes."
>> I have one of those jobs.
>> Yes, obviously
this is about me.
Actually, I've done a few
events, one event just
after the election
of Donald Trump.
It was probably also because
people were really rethinking
our lives, you know, that week.
[ Laughter ]
And I was doing an event, and
the chair asked the audience,
"Who has a bullshit job?"
And I think about a third of
all hands went up in the air.
>> So define a bullshit job.
>> I don't know,
that's not for me.
That's the brilliant
thing about --
>> Yeah, but what makes
it a bullshit job?
>> People can define it
for themselves, right?
So if people say about their own
job that it doesn't add anything
of value, that they're
basically just sending emails
to other people all day or
writing reports no one reads,
or inventing financial products
that only destroy value.
[ Laughter ]
>> It sounds like politics.
>> Trying to get people to
click on ads all the time.
I mean, that's basically
what a big part
of the economy is right now.
There's some interesting
research from when we look
at what graduates of the
Ivy League universities
in the US do.
You know, just 30 or 40 years
ago they all went to work
for NGO's, the universities,
government, et cetera.
Nowadays they go either to
Wall Street or Silicon Valley.
What do they do in Wall Street?
They start rent seeking.
They start actually
destroying value.
If you don't believe me,
read the recent reports
from the International
Monetary Fund.
I mean, they're basically
saying the same thing.
And Silicon Valley, well there's
a great quote from someone
who worked at Facebook
for a few years.
And he said that the best minds
of my generation are thinking
about how to make
people click ads.
And that's pretty sad, isn't it?
>> There was also, you
write about the strikes
and different classes of
workers going out on strike.
Talk us through that.
>> Well, I was just thinking,
there is one other
way you can find
if you have a bullshit
job, yes or no.
I mean, just stop doing it,
right, and see what happens.
[ Laughter ]
>> Another scientific
experiment.
>> Yeah, exactly.
I'm just going to look
throughout history
at what happened when different
professions went on strike.
So at first I thought, you know,
I want to look at a profession
that is really, really
important, that if they go
on strike, it's a disaster.
I thought the doctors are
probably a good example.
So I looked it up, and actually
when doctors go on strike,
life expectancy goes up.
[ Laughter ]
So that was probably
not a very good example.
But I thought, well,
probably garbage collectors.
They are probably
a good example.
And throughout history,
you know, whenever they go
on strike, it is a disaster.
So in the book I tell
the story of a strike
of garbage collectors
in New York in 1968.
It lasted for just six days
and the emergency state
had to be declared.
And it turns out, you know,
a big city like New York,
they really cannot do
without garbage collectors.
And then I wondered, you know,
has it ever happened
throughout all of world history
that the bankers went on strike?
I was really curious about that.
So I started researching
it and researching it
and I started actually, I don't
know, 3000 BC with the rise
of finance, et cetera.
And I found only one example
in all of world history,
and this was in Ireland, 1970.
The bankers were angry that
their wages were not keeping
up with inflation, so they said,
"You know what, you'll have it.
We'll just stop working and then
you'll see just how important
we are."
And at that point, all the
experts, all the economists,
they all predicted this
would be a heart attack
for the economy, right?
We really cannot do
without these bankers.
The strike started and
nothing much happened actually.
[ Laughter ]
The garbage collector
strike was six days
and this strike was
six months actually.
And then the bankers came
back and said, "All right,
all right, all right."
[ Laughter ]
"We'll go back to
work this year."
>> Who would have thought that
bankers have bullshit jobs?
>> Who'd have thought, yeah?
[ Laughter ]
And I think what actually
in reality happened was
even more interesting,
is that what the Irish did is
they immediately invented their
own financial system.
So they started writing
IOU's to each other you know,
on the backs of cigar boxes or
on toilet paper or whatever.
>> This is the Irish.
>> Yeah, yeah.
And what's also important
here were the pubs.
So there were 15,000 pubs
at that time in Ireland.
And the owners of the
pubs basically became the
new bankers.
[ Laughter ]
>> That's so harsh.
>> There's one economist who
later wrote that you know,
if you sell liquids
to your clients,
then you probably
also know something
about their liquidity, right?
[ Laughter ]
So that is what happened.
They invented a new
financial system.
The economy just kept growing.
Businesses just kept operating.
It wasn't a huge deal.
And actually, when
one journalist wrote
about this event, 20-30
years later, she said, "Well,
people don't remember much about
it, probably because you know,
it didn't change much."
And that's probably why so
many people have forgotten
about this, the one and
only strike of bankers
in all of world history.
And I think it also
shows that sure, I mean,
we need a financial sector
or we need a money system.
The Irish immediately
invented a new one.
But we can do without
a lot of the bullshit
that is in the current one.
You know, all the
speculation and stuff.
>> So if it makes as much
imminent sense as you say
and so well articulate the idea
of the basic universal income,
why hasn't it been
more widely adopted?
>> I don't know.
As a historian, I don't
believe in big historical laws
or reasons or whatever.
But if you really delve into
the history of basic income
in the '70's, that
you'll just be astonished
by the coincidences and that
it could easily have gone the
other way.
What I think is fascinating is
that if you look at these kind
of utopian ideas, crazy
ideas you could say,
is that they always start
on the fringes of society.
They always start with
people who are dismissed
as unreasonable and
unrealistic, et cetera.
And then they start to
move towards the centre.
So if you look at the basic
income debate, you know,
it started in the '60's
and then at the end
of the '60's everyone thought
it was going to be happening
at the beginning of the '70's.
Or Nixon said, "Sure,
let's implement it."
And I think we can sort
of see history repeating
itself right now.
I mean, just a few years ago,
in 2013 when I first wrote
about basic income -- well, you
should know that the Dutch word
for basic income is [Dutch word]
which sort of means base salary.
And we only used it in
one context back then,
as the base salary
of the bankers.
So when I wrote about basic
income, people thought,
"You want to have base
salaries for bankers?
What are you talking about?"
And now, I mean just a few
years later you see all these
experiments popping up
and actually sometimes even
politicians are debating it.
But I think it also shows you
that it never begins
with politicians.
It only ends there.
Just like it almost
ended with Nixon,
but it will never start there.
>> Is it now gaining currency
and a certain inevitability
because of the rapid pace
of automation and the talk
of artificial intelligence,
meaning robots are going
to take all our jobs?
You know, some of the
predictions of 50-60%
of all jobs done now won't exist
in sort of 20 or 30 years --
is that just going to
necessitate this conversation
where we have to find a way
to survive one way or another?
>> Well, again, as a historian,
if you look at that debate,
that the robots are going
to take all our jobs,
you sort of have the feeling
like, "I heard this before."
And then you go back to
the archives for the '60's
for example, or also
in the 1920's people
were saying that as well.
This is a very old story.
So if you are a journalist right
now working for, I don't know,
Wired or something like
that, or a tech magazine,
I really recommend go to
the archives, copy, paste,
publish again and
you're done for the day.
So I think what we
underestimated is
that capitalism has a quite
extraordinary ability to come
up with new bullshit
jobs, right?
This can go on for
a very long time.
And that's really something
that people didn't
predict in the '60's.
They thought, "You know,
if the robots are going
to take all those jobs,
which they did, you know,
then we'll just start
living the good life
and boredom will be the great
challenge of the future."
But they never thought that
capitalism would be so adaptive.
And I mean now it's 30% or 40%,
could be 60% in the future.
Could be 100%.
I mean, it's theoretically
possible that we'll live
in a society where
everyone is just pretending
to work while we're all in
reality browsing Facebook.
I mean, many workplaces are
already like that, right?
>> Exactly what I was thinking.
Yeah. Look, one of the
other issues you raise
in the book is the
concept of open borders,
which we've actually talked
about on this stage before.
It's a radical concept
and for most people,
especially the Parliament,
they think chaos.
You only have to look to Germany
they would say and what happened
with a million people
flooding in.
>> Well, it's not chaos there.
I live quite close to Germany
and they're doing
quite well actually.
>> It's certainly the story the
politicians want to tell us.
>> Yeah, yeah.
You know, the idea
of open borders
around the globe is
definitely the most radical idea
in my book.
But it might also be
the most important one.
Because I believe that
Utopian thinking always starts
with thinking about
what is wrong
with our current society
or the current world.
It always starts with the
injustices in the hear and now.
So a basic income is the
answer to millions of people
in meaningless jobs,
millions of people in poverty,
the idea of a 15-hour work-week
is the answer to you know,
so many people that are
completely stressed out
and have no time
to devote to things
that they really care about.
And open borders is the answer
to probably the biggest
injustice in all of the world,
is just the incredible
inequality that still exists.
And meanwhile, we've got
a mountain of evidence.
And I go over all that
evidence in the chapter
about open borders that shows
that so many of the things
that we have against immigration
are simply factually incorrect.
So they're not lazy.
They don't take our jobs.
They actually create more jobs.
It's not true that they're
all violent criminals,
et cetera, et cetera.
If you look at the actual
data, it's simply not true.
So I felt I had to talk
about that most utopian
of ideas as well.
>> What happens to the
countries left behind?
So the countries that are
not wealthy or prosperous
and in conflict and so on?
If everyone flees, what happens?
They just become failed states.
>> I think the evidence shows
that home countries benefit
from immigration as well.
So if we look at something
like the amount of money
that immigrants send back
to their own country,
it's triple the amount of
official development aid.
So that's pretty huge.
And if we have actually
breathing borders,
so people are able to get
into a different country
but also get back, then you
know, almost everyone wants
to get back to their home
country at some point.
There's some fascinating
evidence about the border
between Mexico and the US here.
So in the 1970's and in the
1980's, hundreds of thousands
of Mexicans moved to the US,
and it was very easy
to get to the US.
And about 80% of them
moved back again,
because it was easy
to get back as well.
Now, still hundreds of thousands
of Mexicans go to the US,
but they don't go back anymore.
So that's what you do
when you build walls.
People still come, but
they don't go back anymore.
So they're very, very
counterproductive.
So the same thing is
happening in Europe right now.
The higher the walls, the more
illegal immigrants you're going
to get.
>> Is there likely to be
any political appetite
for open borders anytime soon?
>> I don't know.
I mean, I think that the real
politicians are not in places
like Cambara or Washington
or Westminster
or something like that.
I think that real politics
with a capital P is
about changing the zeitgeist,
right, talking about new ideas,
what we're trying to do here.
And if more and more
people recognise
that the status quo is
simply infeasible, you know,
that we need new ideas, which is
I believe happening right now --
I mean, after 2016
with Trump and Brexit,
I mean it's obviously
clear to so many people
that we can't go on like this.
So yeah, I always say that I'm
not an optimist or a pessimist.
I'm a possiblist.
You know, I believe that
things can be different.
But if we want it to
be different, you know,
we've got to get up and
do something, right?
>> With the issue
of open borders,
just in a very pragmatic
sort of logistic sense,
if everyone floods into a
country at the same time,
how does the state cope?
Where do they sleep?
How are they fed if they
haven't got any money?
What do they do?
>> Now don't get me wrong,
the idea of open borders is a
utopian vision for the future.
I think that the road to
utopia is always about a lot
of small steps that you
can take in the direction.
Like taking a little
bit more immigrants
and a little bit
more, et cetera.
Experimenting along the way
and seeing what you can manage.
I think that is what we
should be striving for,
and maybe in the future,
you know, in the year 2200
or 2300 we'll look back on our
time and wonder about you know,
what a crazy, unjust system it
was, that people were not free
to move wherever they wanted.
>> Underlying a lot of what you
talk about as being utopia is
about trying to address
inequality.
And I'm wondering
what you thought
of the Occupy movement
coming as it did
after the global
financial crisis.
It seemed sort of
very well-timed
to capture the international
anger about inequality
and the mood would have seemed
to have been right for change.
Did you think the
Occupy movement was a bit
of a lost opportunity?
>> I think so, yes.
What I've always been really
fascinated by is the huge role
that crises play
in world history.
So if we look for example at
the rise of neo-liberalism,
it's quite interesting that
it all started at the end
of the 1940's with Milton
Friedman the economist,
Fredrick von Haag the
philosopher coming together
with a few other guys.
And they were very
lonely back then.
They said, "You know, everyone
is a socialist right now.
Everyone is a Keynesian
right now.
But what we are going to
do is we are going to try
to build a movement,
develop ideas, you know,
start new institutions,
think tanks, et cetera.
And there will be a time at
some point in the future,
and it might take years and
years, but there will be a time
when the current economic
system or the current body
of it just breaks down."
And they were right.
I mean, in the '70's with
stagflation and the oil crisis
and the inflation, et
cetera, it was suddenly clear
that it was time for
something new according
to many people at least.
And they really grabbed
that opportunity
and they injected those new
ideas, neo-liberal ideas
that they had been inventing
and developing for so long
into the public debate.
So it wasn't Reagan or Thatcher
that started this
revolution, you know?
They inherited these
ideas from other people.
The problem with 2008
with the financial crash
and the Occupy movement was
that there were no new ideas.
I mean, I think that is
still the problem so often
with the left these days,
is that it only knows
what it's against, right?
Against austerity,
against the establishment,
against homophobia, against
racism, against everything.
I mean, that was even a title
of a book recently published
by a New York intellectual,
Against Everything.
First chapter, Against Exercise.
[ Laughter ]
I'm against it all as well.
But you also have to be
for something, right?
We need some vision
of where we want to go
because that is what
progress is always like.
It is always, as Oscar
Wilde once wrote,
"The realisation of utopias."
So we need some vision
of utopia.
>> So you mentioned in the
book that back in the '70's,
this was trialled in
Canada, the basic income.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Talk us through that
and why it was abandoned.
>> This experiment
started in 1974 and it was
in Dothan, a small town there.
What they did is, well,
they basically eradicated
poverty there.
So everyone that fell below
the poverty line, his income
or her income was
immediately topped up.
It was called the
town with no poverty.
>> How many people in the town?
>> A few thousand.
So the amount of families
that received support
was 1,000 families.
Now what happened is that for
four years there were a lot
of economists and
sociologists and anthropologists
who all descended on the
town and did their research,
did interviews, collected
data, et cetera.
Now, after those four years,
they wanted to start
analysing the results.
But you know, it was 1978
and a new conservative
government had come to power.
And they thought, "You know,
this is a really
weird experiment.
What are you doing?
I mean, you're just giving free
money to people and now you want
to analyse the results?
Well, we already know
what the results are.
It was a disaster,
I mean, obviously."
So there was no money left
to analyse the results.
What they did is they put all
the interviews, all the data,
they put it all in the
archives, 2,000 boxes
and everyone forgot about it.
It was only 25 years later
that a Canadian professor Evelyn
Forgier found the records,
did the analysis and discovered
that it had been a huge success.
Healthcare costs went down.
Hospital admissions went down by
8.5% which is huge if you think
about just how much we're
spending on healthcare
in developed countries
these days.
Again, crime went down,
performance better in school,
domestic violence went down.
And mental health
complaints were down.
And you know, what people
worry most about or often is
that you know, was
everyone lazy?
No. Like total work hours
declined by about 1%
and almost every time
this was compensated
by people doing more volunteer
work or going to school longer
or that kind of thing.
So this is one of the
most thorough basic income
experiments that was ever done,
but we had forgotten
about it for so long.
>> Why was it abandoned
if presumably,
anecdotally at least,
they knew it was working,
they would have felt
that it was working?
>> I think it was
really the zeitgeist
that was shifting back then.
So I mean, it was in the '70's
that obviously neo-liberalism
took off, right?
And a conservative government
came into power in 1978
which was already incredibly
influenced by these ideas.
I mean, it was only a few
years later that Reagan
and Thatcher took the stage.
So yeah, I think the
basic income sort
of missed its opportunity
to become real.
>> If you want to start
making your way to the --
it's very hard for
us to see over here,
but if you've got a
question for Rutger,
just hop over to number
one or number two over here
and I'll draw you
into the conversation.
Go ahead.
>> Hi.
>> You're quick.
>> Hi, I'm Dani.
I'm actually part of the
Basic Income Network.
>> Cool.
>> We're a global
group that are trying
to promote basic
income around the world.
And part of the challenge
that I'm having in Australia
at the moment is that the
conversation isn't being
taken seriously.
I think you saw the
idea very much,
that a lot of people
were nodding their heads.
So I think that's
a really good sign.
But what's your advice
for getting corporations,
getting politicians to actually
start listening and to listen
to people like me and not think
I'm just some leftist young
person who doesn't know
what she's talking about?
>> What I've discovered
in the past few years is
that it's really effective
to use right-wing language
to defend progressive ideas.
[ Laughter ]
So what I'm saying all the
time to these business leaders
or politicians, I'm saying,
"Well maybe you don't
have a heart,
but at least you have
a wallet, right?"
>> Yeah.
>> So it simply makes
financial sense.
I think it's no coincidence
that so many people
in Silicon Valley
are now interested.
If we sort of point out that
basic income is an investment
that in the long
run pays for itself,
and in that sense it's
literally free money,
that is probably much
more convincing to people
on the other side of
the political spectrum
than if you just
keep on saying, "Oh,
the current system is so unfair.
And we need to pity these
poor people, et cetera,
and it's immoral to let
them live in poverty."
Which I think is true.
But it will only appeal to a
certain part of the population
and we need to get
bigger than that.
>> And when you're talking
about the financial benefits
and it paying itself
back, you're talking
about the lower health costs
and all the other
things that accrue?
>> Exactly.
There was one study in
the 1990's, actually sort
of a natural experiment.
What happened is that a casino
opened in North Carolina
and it was operated by the
eastern band of Cherokee Indians
and they were allowed to just
distribute the earnings among
their members.
So suddenly thousands of people,
many of them left in poverty,
received $8,000-9,000.
And there's an economist from
UCLA, his name is Randal Aiki
who later calculated
that the savings again
in lower health care costs, kids
performing better in school,
lower crime rates, these
savings were bigger
than the cash grants themselves.
Now just think about that.
That is really radical
and really fascinating.
It has huge implications for
what we should do about poverty
and about this whole debate.
Because normally the
debate goes like this.
The left says, "We've got
to help these poor people."
And then the right says, "Yeah,
maybe, but it's too expensive."
End of debate, right?
But you can really flip
it around if it's like,
"We've got to do this
because it makes sense.
I mean, this is an investment.
It's just a good
business decision."
>> Does it end up harmonising
what everybody says?
So it in itself is
more equalising?
>> That's a really
great question.
And it's also one of the
most overlooked effects
of a basic income.
So just imagine, if you are a
garbage collector, a teacher
or a nurse and you suddenly
receive a basic income,
well it is also a
universal strike fund, right?
You can go on strike
all the time.
So you'll have a lot
more bargaining power
and your wage will
probably have to go up.
Now if you are a banker
or consultant or a lawyer
or whatever, and
you go on strike,
well nothing much happens.
So you don't have
extra bargaining power
and your wage will probably
go down a little bit.
So if we implement
the basic income,
in the long run wages will start
reflecting the social value
of different jobs much more.
And we could move
towards a society
where cleaners earn
more than bankers.
And I'd like to live in
that society actually.
[ Laughter ]
[ Applause ]
>> Hi. I'd like to know where
will the money come from?
Will it be like a tax
of the multinationals?
And also, who are your
staunchest critics
and how do you navigate them?
>> Okay, so this is obviously
a very important part
of the whole basic
income debate.
Like how are we going
to finance it?
And I believe that the devil
is really in the details.
So there are many,
many ways to do it.
There are some forms of
basic income out there
that I believe would
be a disaster.
There are some neo-libertarians
on the right who say,
"Let's just get rid of
the whole welfare state.
You know, let's get rid
of universal healthcare,
let's get rid of
public education
and just give people one cash
grant transfer and that's it."
That's not what I'm arguing for.
I think that basic income should
be the crowning achievement
of capitalism, but also
of social democracy.
It should really be
implemented as a supplement
to universal healthcare
and public education,
which are incredibly
important achievements
of the 20th century.
Now I'd like to finance
the basic income in a way
with taxes, so not just print
out money, but with taxes
from the welfare
state right now.
I'd like to fund it in a way
that it will reduce inequality.
And well, there are probably
different sources you'd need,
but the most obvious thing
to start with is wealth.
Just if you look at the
incredible inequality
that is growing around
the world, you know,
in the western world as well,
I mean everyone has heard
of Thomas Beckett, right?
We didn't actually read his
book, but we know his argument.
That's probably the most
logical lace to start.
But there are many
versions out there.
So we should be wary of --
well, it sometimes happens
that people say, "Oh,
everyone is in favour
of basic income,"
but we're actually talking
about different things.
So that's something
to look out for.
>> And the second part
of your question was,
who are your staunchest critics
and how do you navigate them?
>> I think that like the biggest
criticism that comes up time
and time again is that
people basically say, "Well,
this all sounds very
nice and well,
but you've just got
a misguided view
of what humanity
is really like."
That is something that people
go back to all the time.
Like in the end, humans are
just corrupt and we want
to be free riders and you know,
deep down we're just
monsters or animals.
And civilisation is
this very thin layer
and you're just being very
nave about all this.
What I think is that that vision
of human nature is very
unrealistic and very nave.
That is something that the
evidence actually shows us.
But deep down or fundamentally,
the debate around basic
income is a debate
around what we are really like.
Are we nice and creative?
Do we want to contribute
to the common good?
You know, are we
essentially social beings,
or are we all freeloaders, free
riders that just are selfish
and want to get as
much for ourselves.
That is the big debate that
is behind basic income.
>> Thank you.
Yes?
>> Hi, Rutger.
Thank you for putting forth
your thoughts this afternoon.
I'm a fan of the universal
basic income as an initiative.
I've come across
it and read a bit
on it the last couple of years.
I think it's important for
it to be understood not
as a new concept but
rather as something
that has been around
for a while.
Maybe it's just gotten lost
a bit in the last generation.
I guess my thoughts on it is
that there seems to be a lot
of distrust from both sides
of politics as to how it's
to be administered on
a government level.
So I suppose my question
is this:
how best can it be administered
on a government level?
Yeah, that's basically
my question.
>> What will probably
not happen is
that a basic income will be
implemented in one stroke.
We will probably get
there gradually, you know,
one small step after another.
And there are many
roads to utopia.
So one of the roads is
the roads of experiments.
You know, just doing
more of those experiments
and seeing what works
along the way.
I mean, that's happening
in Finland,
in Canada and in other places.
The other thing you could do is
to make our current welfare
system more basic income-ish,
you know, to move it
in that direction,
make it a bit more
unconditional,
make it a big more universal.
Make it a bit more individual.
>> But the political
problem with that --
pardon the interruption --
the political problem
with that always is
that society generally
doesn't want
to give wealthy people
more money.
>> It just really depends
on how you frame it.
So with a basic income,
if you would finance it
with the welfare for example or
with progressive taxation, sure,
the rich will receive a
basic income, but they'll pay
for five basic incomes or ten
basic incomes or whatever.
If we compare different
countries now internationally,
it's actually the countries
with the most universal systems
where for example
also the middle class
or even the rich benefit from
free childcare or whatever,
free public education,
it is those countries
that are best at
reducing poverty.
And the reason is very simple:
if everyone benefits it's
just very difficult to get rid
of a certain policy or system.
The problem in the
UK and the US is
that they are very
targeted systems of welfare.
Then if a politician comes
along and is looking for money,
you know, it's very easy to
get rid of those policies
or that kind of very small,
targeted welfare state.
And these people are not really
able to defend themselves.
They'll lose a lot of
votes when they do that.
Now if you have a very
universal welfare state
like in northern Europe
or in Australia as well,
especially when you look
at universal healthcare,
it's nearly impossible
to get rid of.
You know, in many countries, as
a politician, if you really want
to touch universal healthcare,
I mean you're finished
as a politician.
Now, we've got one state
that has implemented
a small basic income.
That's Alaska.
They finance it with oil money
and it's about $2,000 each year.
Now if as a politician in Alaska
you want to touch that money,
which some politicians
have tried,
it's the end of your career.
>> And that operates
throughout Alaska?
>> Yeah. Yeah, so I believe
if you've lived there
for a few years, you'll get it.
>> And does it cancel out
other welfare payments?
>> No, no.
>> It's in addition to other
specific welfare measures?
>> Yeah. And the framing is
also again very different.
So a basic income is a right.
It's not a favour.
It's just something you deserve
simply because you exist.
Now the language we use
around our current welfare
system is really one
of conditionality.
Like only the deserving poor
can get it and you really have
to prove time and time again
that you're sick enough,
that you are depressed enough,
that you are really
a hopeless case
that will never get anything
done in your whole life.
And once you've proved that,
then you'll get a very
small amount of money.
Now just imagine what
that does to people.
If you've got to fill
in thousands of forms
and interviews, et cetera,
where all the time you're
basically talking yourself down,
well is it really surprising
that then people
become depressed
and find it very hard
to get a job, right?
[ Applause ]
>> Hi, Rutger.
My name's Mark and
as a bureaucrat
in a bullshit job I take a lot
of offence at what you said.
[ Laughter ]
But as you know, the modern
welfare state has indexation
regimes that keep the
rate of payment in line
with things like inflation.
>> Yeah.
>> So what kind of indexation
regime are you envisioning
for a universal basic income?
And if you give people that base
level of income, won't the price
of products just rise in
accordance with that level?
>> That's a good question.
So it really depends again
on how you finance it.
If you just fund the basic
income with printing a lot
of extra money, then
you're obviously going
to get inflation
in the long run.
Now there are some economists
right now who say we should do
that because there's not a
lot of demands in the economy.
And Milton Friedman called
this helicopter money,
like just throwing money
out of helicopters.
Other people call it
quantitative easing
for the people.
Like we're now doing it only
for the banks, but for everyone.
But obviously, in the long run,
that's not a solution, right?
Because you'll get
mass inflation.
So what we have to do is
to finance the basic
income with taxes.
Now this means that
the money supply,
the amount of money
will just be the same.
But inflation is still a risk,
but only if people will turn
out to be massively lazy.
Because then you'll
have the same amount
of money chasing fewer
products and services
and then you'll get inflation.
Now a big part of my book
is obviously about showing
that that is simply
not the case,
that actually it would
probably make the labour market
more dynamic.
Now if inflation is locally
for example still a problem,
then there are side
policies you can use
like indexation, et cetera.
And we've got a lot of great
researchers around the world
that try and answer
the question, you know,
how much money do you need
to live a proper life,
you know, without poverty?
And it differs from
country to country.
But I always say the basic
income has to be high enough
to get people out of poverty and
just support the basic needs.
>> Okay, go on.
>> Thank you.
Did you want to ask
a follow-up question?
>> Yeah. I mean, poverty
is a relative concept.
There are five different
measurements of poverty
that I know of off
the top of my head.
It's like a relative
concept you're talking about.
That it has to be set at the
poverty level, I don't mean
to be offensive, but it's
almost a meaningless statement.
>> To be honest, I
get that remark a lot.
Like, "Oh, there will
always be poverty there
because we've defined
it in a relative way."
But I mean, if you live in
poverty, even in a rich country,
you simply cannot participate
on a proper level in society.
And there's not much
relative about that.
And there's a lot of
research out there that shows
that we can eradicate
it, you know?
We can have a society in
Australia or in Holland
where I'm from where
everyone has the means
to make their own choices.
Where no one has to worry about
being able to pay their rent
or feeding their
children or whatever.
And every society should
obviously have a discussion,
a democratic discussion
about what the definition
of poverty is.
And sure, when we get richer,
then probably the
poverty line will go up.
But that's what progress
should look like, right?
>> Thanks, guys.
>> Yes?
>> Yeah, hi.
My question is about how do you
see this working in countries
of different income levels?
So middle income, low income?
And how do you also see
this as a possibility
of maybe changing how our
economic power is concentrated?
>> Right now in India, there's a
lot of interest in basic income.
Actually, on a high
political level you could say
that they are ahead
of other countries.
Why? Well the reason
is very simple.
India has hundreds
or maybe thousands
of anti-poverty programmes
that are very ineffective.
I mean, there's a lot
of corruption, a
lot of bureaucracy.
And the actual amount of
money that reaches the people
that really need it is little
compared to the amount of money
that is sent in the first place.
So it's probably true that basic
income is a more promising idea
for the developing world
than for the developed world.
It could really make a
huge difference there.
And the thinking behind
it is already making a
huge difference.
In the book I talk about an
NGO called Give Directly.
Well the name says it all.
They just give money directly
to extremely poor people
in Uganda or Kenya.
>> On a per capita basis
rather than channelling it
through the government.
>> Exactly.
Exactly. Just $500 or
$1,000 in huge cash amounts.
They're also doing the
biggest basic income study
that has ever been done
with 10,000 participants.
>> In Uganda.
>> Yeah, and in Kenya.
Really exciting.
And what's also very interesting
about this organisation is
that in the first place,
technological breakthroughs
have made this possible.
So what they can do is
just give people a sim card
and transfer the money to
it and that works very well.
That as simply not
possible 30 years ago.
And the second place is
that they do incredibly
thorough scientific research
on the charity that they
do, which is a big exception
in the world of NGO's
and charity NGO's.
And again, these randomised
controlled trials time
and time find that it's
just a really effective way.
I mean, it's pretty crazy
if you think about it
that we are sending
white people in SUV's
to incredibly poor countries,
where if we just sell the SUV
and hand over their
salaries, I mean it's going
to be a lot more effective.
But we are such incredible
paternalists.
We always believe that we
know what's best for the poor.
We know what's best for
them -- well, we don't.
We really have no idea.
[ Applause ]
>> It's the same basic
concept around micro financing
in developing countries.
>> Exactly.
>> That you give them a loan.
>> It's just that
the cash transfers --
I mean, they come out
as much more effective
in recent scientific research.
It's just much more -- yeah,
if you look at the outcomes,
there's quite a lot of --
there's actually hundreds
of studies right now,
especially in the
global south, where NGO's
and governments have
experimented
with just giving free cash.
Or sometimes with small
conditions such as you've got
to have your kids vaccinated
or send them to school.
But it's a very different kind
of welfare state
than we are used to.
>> How long has Finland
been doing it?
>> Oh, just since the
1st of January this year.
>> And how's that going?
Is it the whole country?
>> Still waiting
for the results.
No, it's just an experiment
with 2,000 participants.
But it's interesting to
see what will happen.
>> Yes?
>> My name's Ava and I'm a
well-known local stirrer.
[ Laughter ]
>> Indeed.
>> And I'm part of a
group that's trying
to get the basic income
going in Australia.
We are spending a large amount
of money on the opposite
of a UBI at the moment,
spending it particularly
on something called the
cashless debit card.
Where we're persecuting the
poor by taking away their cash.
I reckon that we need to ask our
government, and I'm interested
in your viewpoint, to put some
of that cash into an experiment
by giving the same
indigenous groups,
mainly indigenous
communities that have been put
onto a highly conditional card
where they have no control
over their cash,
or only 20% of it,
maybe 50 in the Northern
Territory.
To actually experiment and
give the same people a two-
to three-year break on
an unconditional card.
Because I think given the
evidence you've put up here,
it would provide
evidence for a country
which is extremely
means-test oriented
and extraordinarily
paternalistic,
that we could actually show
that that particular way
of paying money is
much more productive.
What do you think?
>> Well, I completely
agree with you.
[ Applause ]
>> There's a whole
story in the paper today
where the minister's come out
delightedly saying, "It works.
I've been going through
the data."
And I used to teach research
methods and he's wrong.
It doesn't work.
His data is all wrong.
>> Well, there's
one small problem
that I've encountered a few
times, is that you know,
when you talk about
experiments, you really have
to be a barbarian to be
against experiments, right?
We've always got
to try new stuff
and see what works
and what doesn't.
I mean, every big company is
doing experiments all the time,
but somehow governments
are not experimenting.
But that's what you should do.
I mean, that's the way
you learn new things.
Now what I've had a few times
-- I actually had a conversation
with a conservative politician
a few months ago in Holland.
And he said, "Yeah,
experiments are interesting,
et cetera, et cetera.
But the problem is
that it might work."
[ Laughter ]
>> I think that's what
they're scared of here.
That's probably right.
>> That seems to be what you're
actually seeing right now.
So that is I think what
some politicians are afraid
of with the basic
income experiments.
They are really afraid that
it might work very, very well.
>> Thank you.
>> Why would they
be scared of that?
>> Well, then their whole
ideology would crumble, right?
You'd have to revolutionise
the welfare state.
So that is something that people
don't like changing their minds.
That's something that we find
very hard as individuals.
And that's also why these
crises play such a big role
in world history,
because these are moments
where everything breaks down
and no one knows
what's true anymore.
And that's the moments
that things change.
>> And some good opportunity
for things to change.
>> Exactly.
>> Thank you, Ava.
>> Thank you.
[ Applause ]
>> Hi, Rutger.
Just getting back
to financing again,
you touched on automation
previously,
so given the possibility
that we'll have perhaps
nearly all human labour wiped
out by robots in the long-term,
and given that in the
tech industries, you know,
generally the activity is
dominated by single players --
Facebook, Google, Amazon.
Do you see the possibility
that half a dozen companies
could be controlling the bulk
of the world economy?
And how are we going to
get the money off them?
Do we socialise at all?
Do we tax them 90%?
What do we do?
>> Well, you know, I gave a talk
at Google X a few
months ago while I was
on a book tour in the US.
And it was quite
shocking actually.
Someone said to me, "You know,
basic income, that's
a great idea."
Alphabet could finance
that, you know,
the parent company of Google.
"We could give about
$100 to everyone
in California, no problem.
We'll get basic income."
And I thought, well,
maybe Google should
start paying taxes first.
[ Laughter ]
That would be a great
start, right?
[ Applause ]
>> Did you say that to them?
>> Yeah, it was sort
of laughing it off.
Like, "Yeah, yeah,
yeah, yeah, yeah."
[ Laughter ]
They thought it was very
unrealistic of me to assume.
>> To assume that
they should pay taxes.
>> Yeah, or that they ever will.
[ Laughter ]
But yeah, I completely
agree with you that one
of the great challenges of
our time is that there is
so much power now concentrating
in a very small number
of these huge companies.
And yeah, that is a
challenge we've seen before
in the 19th century and we came
up with solutions back then.
We broke up some
of those countries.
Some of them were
even nationalised
or taxed very heavily.
I mean, there is lots of
stuff you can do about that.
But it's obviously that
democracies will be threatened
if you don't do something about
that kind of power accumulating.
>> To ask a follow up, so if
we're talking about these kind
of measures, at the moment
these players are relatively --
you know, they're
relatively small compared
to what they will
be in the future.
Therefore, they're not the
same vested interest today
that they would be when
you actually needed
to have these measures in.
Do you think these measures need
to be implemented
sooner rather than later?
>> Oh, we should have
done it 40 years ago.
I mean, some people say
we need basic income
as an insurance policy for
the rise of the rowboats.
We've already got the evidence.
We've got the means.
We can't waste much
time on this, I believe.
I mean, there are now millions
of people withering
away in poverty.
We are now wasting a
huge amount of talent
of people doing completely
useless jobs.
That is going on right now.
So this is not just
some abstract future I'm
talking about.
It is a very practical idea
that we can do tomorrow.
It's actually probably the
least radical idea in my book.
I mean, really rethinking
work or open borders,
much more radical and utopian.
>> I'm so sorry, everyone,
we are out of time.
I need to wrap up the session.
But you can continue
chatting to Rutger
when he signs your
books out there.
Do continue the conversation.
But for now, please join me
in thanking Rutger Bregman.
[ Applause ]